# Landscape level variability and insect herbivore outbreak captured within modern forests provides a framework for interpreting the fossil record.
Authors: Lauren Azevedo-Schmidt<sup>1*,2</sup>, Anshuman Swain<sup>3</sup>, Lauren Shoemaker<sup>2</sup>, Ellen D. Currano<sup>2,5</sup>

Affiliations: \
<sup>1</sup>Climate Change Institute, University of Maine, Orono, Maine 04412, USA \
<sup>2</sup>Department of Botany and Program in Ecology, University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming, 82071, USA \
<sup>3</sup>University of Maryland, Department of Biology, College Park, 20742, USA \
<sup>4</sup>Harvard University, Departmen of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Cambridge, 02138, USA \
<sup>5</sup>Department of Geology and Geophysics, University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming, USA 82071

Keywords: plant-insect interactions, landscape variability, paleoecology, insect outbreak

The authors request that any data or code used from this publication be properly cited and recognized in future work. 

Temporal patterns observed within paleobotanical fossil datasets investigating potential drivers of insect herbivory are unable to disentangle spatial patterns due to limitations in preservation and comparable modern records. Without the ability to disentangle spatial differences in plant-insect interactions, fossil datasets are limited in understanding these relationships at a broader scale. To address this knowledge gap we used paleobotanical methods within three modern forests (Harvard Forest, Smithsonian Environmental Research Center, and La Selva), creating an analogous dataset which rigorously tested inter- and intra-forest plant-insect variability. Using modern ecological methods such as random mixed effects models and non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) ordinations along with cutting edge bipartite network- and node- level metrics, we quantified variability at the coarsest, all data binned into a single forest, and highest, across individual sampling locations (quarry), resolution. In doing this, we found novel information regarding plant-insect interactions. Total damage frequency and diversity did not differ across forests but differences in functional feeding groups (FFGs) was observed across forests (inter-), correlating with plant diversity, evenness, and latitude. Overall we found higher generalized herbivory within the temperate forests than the wet-tropical, a finding also supported by co-occurrence and network analyses at multiple spatial scales. Additionally, bipartite network analyses captured feeding preference via outbreak of \textit{Lymantria dispar} caterpillars at Harvard Forest; an exciting result as insect herbivory outbreaks have long been unidentifiable within fossil datasets. Intra-forest analyses captured unique and stable DT communities, suggesting that paleobotanical methods adequately capture dominant insect herbivore communities within the fossil record; a previously untested assumption. These results support paleobotanical assumptions about fossil insect herbivore communities while also providing a new framework for future work, specifically targeting modern and fossil outbreaks of insect feeding. 
